---
layout: post
title:  "Linkage Equillibrium and Perfect phylogeny"
description: ""
date:   2021-03-13
tags:
category: genetics
tagline: 
---

# Compare HWE to Linkage Equillibrum
| Hardy Weinberg Equillibrium    | Linkage Equillibrium      |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------|
| 1 locus                        | Many loci                 |
| Allele frequency stay constant | Two locus are independent |

# DNA without recombination
- mtDNA
- Y chromosome

# Perfect Phylogeny

## Assumptions:
1. No recombination
2. Infinite site: 1 position in the genome will NOT mutate 2 times.

## Input: A SNP matrix
Each row is an individual, and each column is a locus. Denote the minor allele as 1, the major allele as 0.

## Output: A tree (perfect phylogeny)
The tree leaves are individuals. Edges are annotated with locus mutation (column).
For every subtree, each locus can only be $all 0$ or $all 1$.

### Property: For any pair of column (loci), either of the 3 condition must be true.
Two columns are column $c$ and column $d$.
denote $c_{1}$ as the rows containing 1 in column $c$. 

For example:
|   | c |
|---|---|
| A |   |
| B | 1 |
| C | 1 |
| D | 1 |
| E |   |
| F |   |
| G |   |
| H |   |

$c_{1} = {B,C,D}$

1. $c_{1} \subset d_{1}$ this means locus $c$ mutated later than locus $d$
2. $d_{1} \subset c_{1}$ this means locus $d$ mutated later than locus $c$
3. $c_{1}$ and $d_{1}$ are disjoint, meaning they are on two branches of the tree.


## The algorithm to construct perfect phylogeny
1. Make all column 0-major.
2. Sort $n \times m$ matrix column so that all column later is either a subset, or disjoint to any previous column.
    - treat all column as a binary number, lexicographically sort them.
    - radix sort of $m$ numbers take $O(m)$ time. But now the number is $n$ bits long. Total time $O(nm)$

3. Split matrix rows into subtrees column by column
    - to add 1 column to the tree, we need to compare at most $m$ columns, each column takes at least $O(m)$ times.
    - Therefore to add all $m$ columns, total time is $O(nm^{2})$
    - We don't need to compare to all previous columns. Once we find a subset-superset relationship, we can stop comparing. This algorithm trick makes total time $O(nm)$


## What will happen if we reorder rows?
Nothing.

We only care about the subset/disjoint relationship. Sorting rows won't change it.


