---
layout: post
title:  "Parameter estimation"
description: "Approximaite Likelihood Method for Recombination"
date:   2021-03-13
tags: []
category: genetics
tagline: 
---

# Coin toss problem
Given the a series of coin toss: $S=$`HTHTHTHTHHHTTTHHH`, assume each toss is independent, estimate the probability of getting Head(H): $P(H) = p$


# Likelihood
Given parameter, what is the probability of getting the data.

In the coin toss problem, parameter is $P(H)$, data is `HTHTHTHTHHHTTTHHH`.

Let's write it formally:

denote the number of heads as $n_{H}$, total coin toss as $n$.

Likelihood = $L = P(S|p) = p^{n_{H}} \times (1-p)^{n-n_{H}}$

# Maximal Likelihood Estimation

We want to find the best parameter to **explain** the data we see. Therefore, we want to maximize the probability of observing the data, given the parameter.

Trying different parameter, until we get the maximal likelihood.

$\argmax_{p} L$ is want we want.

Is it essentially asking: what $p$ best explains the series of coin toss?

To solve this problem, we set $\frac{\partial L}{\partial p} = 0$ and solve for $p$.

# Extending to estimation of recombination rates
In terms of estimating the recombination rate, we need to first derive a model/process how data is generated given recombinations rate. One such model is the Wright-Fisher model.

Suppose we have a population of size $N$, a total of $2N$ haplotypes. With mutation rate $\mu$ and recombinations rate $c$.

The process of data generation will be: starting from $2N$ haplotypes with random binary genotypes, for every individual in the next generation, pick a ancestor from the previous generation when there is no recombination (with probability $(1-c)$. Else pick 2 as its ancestor and perform a crossover with probability $c$. Also consider putting a mutation with probability $\mu$.

To write the likelihood of observing data (the entire matrix), given $\mu, c$ is more difficult in this case. Therefore we will be using an alternative parameter estimation method: Approximate likeihood estimate.

# Approximate likelihood estimate

Unlike Maximal likelhood estimation where we explicity calculate how we get the data (the whole matrix), now we try to see how we can get the similar *summary statistics*. 

